docs/content/architecture/meta.md, before:

+++
title = "Meta-Distribution"
date = 2022-02-09T17:56:26+01:00
weight = 1
pre = "<b>- </b>"
+++

We like to define c3os as a meta Linux Distribution as its goal is to convert any other distro to an immutable layout with Kubernetes Native components.

## Components

The c3OS stack is composed of the following:

- A core OS image release for each flavor in ISO, qcow2, and similar format (currently can pick from openSUSE and Alpine based) - provided for user convenience
- A release with k3s embedded
- A set of Kubernetes Native API components (CRDs) to install into the control-plane node, to manage deployment, artifacts creation, and lifecycle (WIP)
- A set of Kubernetes Native API components (CRDs) to install into the target nodes to manage and control the node after deployment (WIP)
- An agent installed into the nodes to be compliant with Kubernetes Native API components mentioned above

Every component is extensible and modular such as it can be customized and replaced in the stack, and built off either locally or with Kubernetes

##

Commit message:

:memo: Add releases reference and reword docs

docs/content/architecture/meta.md, after:

+++
title = "Meta-Distribution"
date = 2022-02-09T17:56:26+01:00
weight = 1
pre = "<b>- </b>"
+++

We like to define c3os as a meta Linux Distribution as its goal is to convert any other distro to an immutable layout with Kubernetes Native components.



## c3OS

The c3OS stack is composed of the following:

- A core OS image release for each flavor in ISO, qcow2, and similar format (currently can pick from openSUSE and Alpine based) - provided for user convenience
- A release with k3s embedded
- A set of Kubernetes Native API components (CRDs) to install into the control-plane node, to manage deployment, artifacts creation, and lifecycle (WIP)
- A set of Kubernetes Native API components (CRDs) to install into the target nodes to manage and control the node after deployment (WIP)
- An agent installed into the nodes to be compliant with Kubernetes Native API components mentioned above

Every component is extensible and modular such as it can be customized and replaced in the stack, and built off either locally or with Kubernetes

### Internal components

C3OS encompassess several components, some externally, most notably:

- [k3s](https://k3s.io) as a Kubernetes distribution
- [edgevpn](https://mudler.github.io/edgevpn) (optional) as fabric for the distributed network, node coordination and bootstrap. Provides also embedded DNS capabilities for the cluster.
- [elemental-toolkit](https://rancher.github.io/elemental-toolkit/docs/) as a fundament to build the Linux derivative. Indeed, any `Elemental` docs applies to `c3os` as well.
- [nohang](https://github.com/hakavlad/nohang) A sophisticated low memory handler for Linux
