docs/src/pages/installation/raspberry.md, before:

---
layout: "../../layouts/docs/Layout.astro"
title: "Raspberry"
index: 6
---

Kairos supports Raspberry Pi model 3 and 4 with 64bit architecture.

If you are not familiar with the process, it is suggested to follow the [quickstart](/quickstart/installation) first to see how Kairos works.

## Prerequisites

- an SD card with 16gb
- Etcher or `dd`
- A Linux host where to flash the device

## Download

Download the Kairos images from the [Releases](https://github.com/kairos-io/provider-kairos/releases) you are interested into. For example, for RPI and `k3sv1.21.14+k3s1`:

```bash
wget https://github.com/kairos-io/provider-kairos/releases/download/v1.0.0-rc2/kairos-opensuse-arm-rpi-v1.0.0-rc2-k3sv1.21.14+k3s1.img
```

## Flash the image

Plug the SD card to your system - to flash the image, you can either use Etcher or `dd`:

```bash
dd if=kairos-opensuse-arm-rpi-v1.0.0-rc2-k3sv1.21.14+k3s1.img of=<device> oflag=sync status=progress
```

## Configure your node

To configure the device, be sure to have the SD plugged in your host. We need to copy a configuration file into `cloud-config` in the `COS_PERSISTENT` partition:

```
$ PERSISTENT=$(blkid -L COS_PERSISTENT)
$ mkdir /tmp/persistent
$ mount $PERSISTENT /tmp/persistent
$ mkdir /tmp/persistent/cloud-config
$ cp cloud-config.yaml /tmp/persistent/cloud-config
$ umount /tmp/persistent
```

You can, additionally push more cloud config files into such folder following the [yip](https://github.com/mudler/yip) syntax.

Commit message:

docs: Correction to Raspberry instructions (#167)
* :memo: Point out that arm64 images are compressed with xz

* :robot: Append xz to the generated image

docs/src/pages/installation/raspberry.md, after:

---
layout: "../../layouts/docs/Layout.astro"
title: "Raspberry"
index: 6
---

Kairos supports Raspberry Pi model 3 and 4 with 64bit architecture.

If you are not familiar with the process, it is suggested to follow the [quickstart](/quickstart/installation) first to see how Kairos works.

## Prerequisites

- an SD card with 16gb
- Etcher or `dd`
- A Linux host where to flash the device

## Download

Download the Kairos images from the [Releases](https://github.com/kairos-io/provider-kairos/releases) you are interested into. For example, for RPI and `k3sv1.21.14+k3s1`:

```bash
wget https://github.com/kairos-io/provider-kairos/releases/download/v1.0.0-rc2/kairos-opensuse-arm-rpi-v1.0.0-rc2-k3sv1.21.14+k3s1.img
```

## Flash the image

Plug the SD card to your system - to flash the image, you can either use Etcher or `dd`, note it's compressed with "XZ" so we need to decompress it first:

```bash
xzcat kairos-opensuse-arm-rpi-v1.0.0-rc2-k3sv1.21.14+k3s1.img | sudo dd of=<device> oflag=sync status=progress
```

## Configure your node

To configure the device, be sure to have the SD plugged in your host. We need to copy a configuration file into `cloud-config` in the `COS_PERSISTENT` partition:

```
$ PERSISTENT=$(blkid -L COS_PERSISTENT)
$ mkdir /tmp/persistent
$ mount $PERSISTENT /tmp/persistent
$ mkdir /tmp/persistent/cloud-config
$ cp cloud-config.yaml /tmp/persistent/cloud-config
$ umount /tmp/persistent
```

You can, additionally push more cloud config files into such folder following the [yip](https://github.com/mudler/yip) syntax.
